# Basic JavaScript-rendered Hello World

## 📝 Your Notes

### Javascript EcoSystem:

HTML defines a webpage strucure, CSS sets the formatting and appearance,
JavaScript adds interactivity to a webpage.

Under the umbrella:

- The Core Language ECMAScript
- WEB API's including the DOM

### ECMAScript

- standardized by the ECMA TC39 committee
- also used in non-browser environment for example node.js
- ECMAScript defines:
  - syntax (parsing rules, keywords, object literal initialization ...)
  - error handling (throw, try...catch ...)
  - Types (boolean, string, number, function, object ...)
  - global object: In a browser, this global object is the window object, but
    ECMAScript only defines the APIs not specific to browsers, e.g. parseInt,
    parseFloat, decodeURI, encodeURI...
  - prototype-based inheritance mechanism
  - Built-in objects and functions (JSON, Math, Array.prototype methods, Object
    introspection methods)
  - Strict mode

The 12th edition, or ECMAScript 2021, was published in June 2021.

### Web API:

Web APIs are typically used with JavaScript, although this doesn't always have
to be the case. Consists of:

- Specifications like: DOM API, Fetch API, History API ...
- Interfaces (Object types) like: HTMLDivElement, GainNode, CSSRule,
  BufferSource, AudioContext ...

#### DOM (API/Specification):

Designed to be independed of any particular programming language. It is not part
of the Javascript language. (Cross Platform and language independent)

```python
# Python DOM example
import xml.dom.minidom as m
doc = m.parse(r"C:\Projects\Py\chap1.xml")
doc.nodeName # DOM property of document object
p_list = doc.getElementsByTagName("para")
```

Definition: Programming Interface for web documents. The Document Object Model
(DOM) is an architecture that describes the structure of a `document`.

It represents the page so that programs can change the document structure,
style, and content. Represents the document as nodes and objects.

The DOM represents a document with a logical tree. Each branch of the tree ends
in a node, and each node contains objects.

The Document Object Model (DOM) connects web pages to scripts or programming
languages by representing the structure of a document.

- DOM CORE defines among other things: the strucure of the document, the tree
  model, DOM Event architecture

- The HTML DOM API is made up of the interfaces that define the functionality of
  each of the elements in HTML, as well as any supporting types and interfaces
  they rely upon. (the markup specified in terms of the DOM) Layered above the
  abstract concept defined in the DOM Core for example: className Property on
  HTML elements, or API-s such as document.body
  [the HTML DOM API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_DOM_API)

#### Important Interfaces of the DOM API:

In simple terms, the window object represents something like the browser, and
the document object is the root of the document itself.

- Document: The Document interface represents any web page loaded in the browser
  and serves as an entry point into the web page's content, which is the DOM
  tree. (A document containing HTML is described using the Document interface.)

  EventTarget <= Node <= Document (<= HTMLDocument)

- Window: The Window interface represents a window containing a DOM document;
  the document property points to the DOM document loaded in that window. A
  global variable, window, representing the window in which the script is
  running, is exposed to JavaScript code. The Window interface is home to a
  variety of functions, namespaces, objects, and constructors which are not
  necessarily directly associated with the concept of a user interface window.
  In a tabbed browser, each tab is represented by its own Window object; the
  global window seen by JavaScript code running within a given tab always
  represents the tab in which the code is running.

  ! document is a shorthand for window.document

  EventTarget <= Window

HTML or XML (~ SVG: based on an XML syntax ~ XML vocabulary)

### Where Should I Put the Script Tag?

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/436411/where-should-i-put-script-tags-in-html-markup

### Javascript Module System

## Background

It doesn't take long to learn how to make "Hello World" appear on the page with
HTML:

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
  </body>
</html>
```

The browser takes this HTML code and generates
[the DOM (the Document Object Model)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
out of it. The browser then exposes the DOM to JavaScript so you can interact
with it to add a layer of interactivity to your web-page.

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
    <script type="module">
      // your JavaScript here
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Years ago, people were generating HTML on the server and then adding JavaScript
on top of that generated HTML for interactivity. However, as requirements for
that interactivity became more challenging, this approach produced applications
that were difficult to maintain and had performance issues.

So modern JavaScript frameworks were created to address some of the challenges
by programmatically creating the DOM rather than defining it in hand-written
HTML.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.html)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.html)

It's important to have a basic understanding of how to generate and interact
with DOM nodes using JavaScript because it will help you understand how React
works under the hood a little better. So in this exercise we're actually not
going to use React at all. Instead we're going to use JavaScript to create a
`div` DOM node with the text "Hello World" and insert that DOM node into the
document.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 generate the root node

[Production deploy](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.html)

Rather than having the `root` node in the HTML, see if you can create that one
using JavaScript as well.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=01%3A%20Basic%20JavaScript-rendered%20Hello%20World&em=dombo.peter%40gmail.com).
